# Setting up translations

If you want to add a new language, you will need to create your own /translations repository if you have not done so already. [Go here](../modules.md) for instructions on how to do this.

Both the CMS and the app are capable of supporting multiple languages, and the process for adding a new language is the same for both. You _do not_ need to deploy multiple instances of the CMS or the app to support multiple languages. Simply follow the steps below.

Log into the CMS and go to the `/data-management` page.

From this page you can download spreadsheets for the app translations, CMS translations, content translations countries and provinces. These sheets have empty column(s) where you can enter in your translations. Once filled in you can them upload these sheets one at a time on the same page. The CMS will generate and download files for you to add into your `/translations` submodule. Continue reading for more details.

## Locales

In the /translations submodule we use the `Locale` type to ensure all translations files are in place for all languages that are being used.

To add a new language, start by simply expanding the `Locale` type to include the new language. Make this change in your `packages/core/src/modules/translations/index.ts` file.

```diff
-export type Locale = 'en'
+export type Locale = 'en' | 'fr'
```

Once you have made this change, if you try to compile you will get typescript errors, these error messages will help you find places in the code that need to be updated with this new language. Right now there will be many errors, that is not a problem, continue following these steps.

## App translations

Download the app translations sheet from the CMS. Enter your translations in the empty column next to the original values.

Alternatively, there is a similar spreadsheet which includes screenshots of the app, to give more context for the text being translated. Request this from the relevant person. (This is not required)

Once this sheet has been filled in, you can upload it on the `/data-management`. Specify the language code in the text input field before clicking upload. Uploading your sheet will generate and download a `.ts` file. You can then add this file to the `/packages/core/src/modules/translations/app` folder.

Make sure the name of the file and the name of the const within it matches the language code of the new language that you are adding. Eg 'fr' for French.

Filename: `fr.ts`

```ts
export const fr = {
  // ...
}
```

Next you need to import and use this file in `/translations/app/index.ts`

```diff
import { en } from './en'
+import { fr } from './fr'

export const appTranslations: Record<Locale, AppTranslations> = {
  en,
+ fr
}
```

> Make sure to commit and push your changes to the `/translations` submodule. Do _not_ run `yarn modules` before pushing your changes otherwise they will be lost.

## Adding content translations

Same as before, you can download a spreadsheet for the content translations from the CMS. This sheet has empty columns where you can enter in your translations.

Some columns contain the word `original` in the header. These are the original values which are already being used, and the empty column next to it is where you can enter the translation for that value. For example `category_title_original` column may contain the titles in english, and the `category_title` column is where you can enter the translation for these titles in the new language.

Once this sheet has been filled in you can specify the language code in the text input field and upload it on the same page. This will automatically generate and download a `.ts` file.

Add this file into the `/packages/core/src/modules/translations/content` folder. Make sure the name of the file and the name of the const within it, and the `locale` property within the object matches the language code. eg 'fr' for French.

> If you are adding a new language that does not yet exist in your submodule, new Ids will automatically be generated for all the content, if you are updating an existing language it will keep the same Ids

Filename: `fr.ts`

```ts
export const fr = {
  locale: 'fr',
  // ...
}
```

Next you need to import and use this file in `/translations/content/index.ts`

```diff
import { en } from './en'
+import { fr } from './fr'

export const content: Record<Locale, StaticContent>  = {
  en,
+  fr,
}
```

Next you will generate an SQL file to insert this translated content into the DB. Additionally, since some articles can be `live: false`, you will also generate a "live" content file that excludes these non-live articles, for use in the app.

Both of these files can be generated by running this one command:

```bash
yarn generate-content-files
```

This will generate an SQL called `insert-content-fr.sql` and a 'live' content file called `fr.ts` (where fr is whatever language code you are using).

To insert into the DB, copy the contents of the SQL file, go to adminer > `SQL command`, paste the SQL and execute.

For instructions on updating content after this initial set up, [go here](./updating_content.md)

Remember to commit, and push your changes to the `/translations` submodule.

## Other translations

You will need to add translations for other things such as country names, provinces, calendar names, themes, and avatars. There are also some changes required within the /assets submodules.

Countries and provinces can be handled in a similar way as the app and content translations, you can download a sheet, add your changes, then upload, to generate a `.ts` file, which then needs to be added into your translations submodule.

With these sheets, please specify the language code in the first row. You can add multiple languages at once with these sheets, by simply adding multiple columns, with different language codes in the first row.

The `countries.ts` and `provinces.ts` files both belong in the `/packages/core/src/modules/translations/` folder.

Translations for some small things like the calendar need to be edited manually in the code. Compilation errors will help guide you to the places where these translations need to be added.

## Compilation

If you are not sure what translations are missing, you can run the following command to compile the code.

```bash
yarn compile
```

If there are any errors, the compiler will tell you what data is missing. If the code compiles successfully then you have successfully added your new language, and you can test it in the app.

> Make sure to commit and push your changes to the `/translations` submodule. Do not run `yarn modules` before pushing your changes otherwise they will be lost.

## CMS translations

Since the CMS is an internal tool, it is not strictly necessary to add translations for all of the languages that the app supports. However, if you do want to add translations for the CMS, you can follow these steps.

The process for adding CMS translations is very similar. Download, fill in, then upload a spreadsheet for CMS translations. The file generated from uploading the spreadsheet is `.json`, and this file needs to be added to the `/packages/cms/src/i18n/translations` folder. Make sure this file is named with the language code, eg `fr.json`.

In the `/packages/cms/src/i18n/options.ts` file, you need to add a require statement for the new json file, and add a new item to the `cmsLanguages` array, with the locale code and name of the language.

```diff
export const cmsTranslations = {
  en: require('./translations/en.json'),
+  fr: require('./translations/fr.json'),
```

```diff
export const cmsLanguages = [
  {
    name: 'English',
    locale: 'en',
  },
+  {
+    name: 'Français',
+    locale: 'fr',
+  },
```
